Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to sign up via the link in
the description to get all of the lab files
for this course, so you can try it out yourself
in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA, click the link in the video description
to check it out.
It’s a network simulator like packet tracer,
but it’s even better, and it includes all
of these guided labs to not only help you
get hands-on practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the
exam topics.
I used it myself when studying for my certifications,
so I feel confident about recommending it
to all of you.
If you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
In this lab we’ll do some basic OSPF configurations
in this small network.
This is very similar to Day 25’s lab, EIGRP
configuration, with a few small differences.
Let’s get started.
First of all, before recording this video
I already completed step 1.
I want you to get some extra practice with
the basics like configuring host names and
IP addresses, but at this point in the course
I don’t think there’s any need to record
myself doing it.
So, first up I’ll do steps 2 and 3 on each
router.
Step 2 is to configure a loopback interface
on each router.
As I have explained before, a loopback interface
is a virtual interface in the router, it’s
not a physical interface.
I’ll give a brief overview of them in one
of these OSPF videos, but basically they are
useful in that they can always be in an up/up
state, unlike physical interfaces which can
go down due to hardware failures, etc.
Then step 3 is to do some basic OSPF configurations
on each router.
I’ll start on R4 and then work toward R1.
First enter privileged exec mode with ENABLE.
Then CONF T. Let’s configure that loopback
interface.
INTERFACE L0.
Notice these messages indicating that the
interface has come up as soon as I create
the interface.
IP ADDRESS 4.4.4.4 255.255.255.255.
Let me check that it was created.
DO SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
There it is, and the IP address is 4.4.4.4.
By the way, if you really want to make sure
the subnet mask is correctly configured you
need to use a different command, because as
you can see the subnet mask is not displayed
in the output of SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
So let’s use this command instead.
DO SHOW INTERFACE L0.
Look here, ‘Internet address is 4.4.4.4/32’.
I like using SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF for a
quick look at interfaces, but sometimes you
might have to use other commands.
Okay, now let’s configure OSPF.
ROUTER OSPF, and I’ll use a process ID of
4.
Remember what I said in the lecture video,
this process ID is only significant to the
local router, the other routers don’t care
about it.
Just to show that, I’ll use a different
process ID on each router, and you will see
that they still become OSPF neighbors.
Next up let’s activate OSPF on R4’s interfaces.
I think I showed you this trick in the EIGRP
lab, but if you want to activate OSPF on all
interfaces at once you can do this.
NETWORK 0.0.0.0 255.255.255.255 AREA 0.
That’s configuring a range of 0.0.0.0/0,
which includes all IPv4 addresses.
Remember that the network command uses a wildcard
mask, so 255.255.255.255 is like a subnet
mask of 0.0.0.0.
So, OSPF is enabled on all interfaces.
In real networks it’s recommended that you
be more precise about which interfaces you
activate OSPF on, I just wanted to show you
that little trick for quickly setting up OSPF
in labs.
Now, we are also instructed to configure passive
interfaces where appropriate.
F1/0 and F2/0 are connected to routers, so
we shouldn’t make them passive, but G0/0
should be passive.
PASSIVE-INTERFACE G0/0.
Not only G0/0, but Loopback0 also.
Routers will send OSPF hello messages on loopback
interfaces, even though they are connected
to nothing.
So, PASSIVE-INTERFACE L0.
I’ll take a look at some OSPF show commands
when we get to R1, but for now let me quickly
go through the configurations on R3 and R2.
R3 next.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE L0.
IP ADDRESS 3.3.3.3 255.255.255.255.
Now let’s configure OSPF.
ROUTER OSPF, and this time a process ID of
3.
Let’s try another way of enabling OSPF on
each interface, specifying the exact IP address
with a /32 mask.
First up, F1/0.
NETWORK 10.0.13.2 0.0.0.0 AREA 0.
Next, F2/0.
NETWORK 10.0.34.1 0.0.0.0 AREA 0.
Finally, Loopback0.
NETWORK 3.3.3.3 0.0.0.0 AREA 0.
Here on R3 there’s only one interface we
need to make a passive interface, Loopback0.
PASSIVE-INTERFACE L0.
Okay that’s all for R3, next up I’ll configure
R2.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE L0.
IP ADDRESS 2.2.2.2 255.255.255.255.
Now let’s configure OSPF.
Again, I’ll use a different process ID,
but usually I’d just use process ID 1 for
all routers.
ROUTER OSPF 2.
I’ll enable OSPF on both physical interfaces
first like this.
NETWORK 10.0.0.0 0.0.255.255 area 0.
Then the loopback interface.
NETWORK 2.2.2.2 0.0.0.0 AREA 0.
And let’s make that a passive interface.
PASSIVE-INTERFACE L0.
Okay, that’s all here on R2.
Finally let’s move to R1.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE L0.
IP ADDRESS 1.1.1.1 255.255.255.255.
Now let’s configure OSPF.
ROUTER OSPF 1.
So, we are told we don’t need to enable
OSPF on the Internet link.
Why is that?
Well, we are going to advertise a default
route to the other routers later, but there’s
no need for them to know about this point-to-point
connection between R1 and ISPR1.
If R2 needs to reach a server over the Internet,
for example, it just needs to know to send
the traffic to R1, there’s no need to know
what subnet is used for the connection between
R1 and ISPR1.
So, we won’t activate OSPF on the interface
unnecessarily.
I’ll do each interface one by one.
NETWORK 10.0.12.0 0.0.0.3 AREA 0.
NETWORK 10.0.13.0 0.0.0.3 AREA 0.
NETWORK 1.1.1.1 0.0.0.0 AREA 0.
Notice that for each router I configured the
network statements a little differently.
On R4 I used a single command to enable OSPF
on all interfaces.
On R3 I specified the exact address on each
interface.
On R2 I enabled the two physical interfaces
with one command.
Here on R1 I configured the network address
of each interface.
Just be aware that there is more than one
way to enable OSPF on each interface.
Okay, now let’s make Loopback0 a passive
interface.
PASSIVE-INTERFACE L0.
Before checking out some show commands here,
let’s do step 4 and configure R1 to advertise
a default route.
First I’ll do DEFAULT-INFORMATION ORIGINATE.
Currently, a default route isn’t configured
though, so let’s EXIT, and now configure
it.
IP ROUTE 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0, and set the next
hop to ISPR1’s G0/0/0 interface, 203.0.113.2.
Okay, we’re done with the configurations
so I’ll use EXIT to return to privileged
exec mode.
First let’s check out SHOW IP PROTOCOLS.
We’ve already covered the output of this
command, I just want to highlight that the
loopback interface’s IP address of 1.1.1.1
became the router ID, and because we configured
DEFAULT-INFORMATION ORIGINATE, it says ‘It
is an autonomous system boundary router’,
an ASBR.
An ASBR advertises outside networks into the
OSPF domain, such as when R1 advertises a
default route to the Internet into the OSPF
domain.
Now let’s look at a few OSPF-specific commands.
I will cover these in detail in the next few
videos, but here’s just a preview of them.
First, to view the Link State Database, LSDB,
use this command.
SHOW IP OSPF DATABASE.
Here you can see all of the LSAs in the LSDB.
Notice there are a few types displayed.
‘Router’ link states, ‘Net’ link states,
and ‘Type-5 AS External’ link states.
I’ll talk more about these in the next video.
Here’s another command, to view R1’s OSPF
neighbors.
SHOW IP OSPF NEIGHBOR.
As expected, R2 and R3 are listed as OSPF
neighbors.
And one more command, SHOW IP OSPF INTERFACE.
You can specify an individual interface if
you want, or just view all interfaces.
This gives details about the current OSPF
settings on the interface, such as the various
timers OSPF uses.
Feel free to look around at the output of
these commands if you want, but I will explain
their output in a future video, just wanted
to make you aware of them.
Finally, let’s do step 5.
Check the routing tables of R2, R3, and R4.
What default routes were added?
Let’s check R2 first.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
The default route is down here, via 10.0.12.1,
which is R1, as expected.
Now let’s check R3.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Okay, R3’s default route is via R1, 10.0.13.1.
Now let’s check R4, and you might see something
a little unexpected.
What do you think the next hop of the default
route will be, R2 or R3?
Note that the connection between R1 and R2
is a gigabitethernet connection, while the
others are fastethernet.
Since I already taught you that OSPF uses
interface bandwidth to calculate the metric,
you probably expect the path via R2 to be
preferred, and expect that it will be the
only one entered into the routing table because
of a lower metric value.
Let’s see.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Well, it looks like both routes have been
added, so R4 will load-balance over both paths.
Why is that?
Well, I will explain that in future videos.
But if you want to do some independent research,
try to find the answer yourself!
If you think you know the answer, post it
in the comment section!
Okay, so in this lab we did some basic OSPF
configurations in this network, including
passive interfaces and advertising a default
route.
That’s all for this lab.
Now let’s check out a bonus lab in Boson
NetSim for CCNA.
Okay, for today's Boson NetSim lab preview
we're going to take a quick look at this lab
here, planning and configuring single-area
OSPF.
Here is the lab topology, there are four routers.
Routers 1 and 3, and 2 and 4 are connected
with fastethernet.
But routers 1 and 2, and 3 and 4 are connected
with a serial connection, and as it says here
it is using 'frame relay' as the Layer 2 encapsulation.
So, frame relay is a layer 2 encapsulation,
like Ethernet, but it's used on serial connections.
Now, some other options for serial connections
are PPP and HDLC.
Now, in the current CCNA you don't have to
know these in-depth.
I will mention them briefly in these OSPF
videos, but the main focus is the Ethernet
layer 2 encapsulation.
Okay, down here are the commands you need
to know to complete this lab, the IP addresses
on each device, and then the lab tasks.
So, this lab is divided into four main tasks.
Verify initial configurations, plan for OSPF,
configure OSPF, and verify OSPF.
So, in the first OSPF video, the first lecture
video, I only covered the absolute basics
of OSPF.
So we're not actually ready to complete this
whole lab.
But that's okay, we'll just do task 1 and
a little bit of task 2 so you can see what
this lab is like.
And if you want to try it out yourself, you
can get a copy of NetSim from the link in
the description and try it out yourself here
in NetSim.
Okay, task 1.
Verify initial configurations.
Step 1, verify the IP address and state of
each interface on each router.
So, I'm already in the CLI of Router1, so
let's check here.
SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
Let's check with the IP addresses table here.
Serial0, 10.1.0.1, looks good, FastEthernet0/1
(*1/0), 10.0.0.1, looks good.
Okay, and they are both up and up.
Now let's check out Router2.
To open Router2, click here on the right side
under devices, and click on console.
Okay, serial0/0, 10.1.0.2, looks good.
And fastethernet1/0, 10.2.0.2.
Okay, and they are both up and up.
Next I'll check out Router3.
Okay, serial0 is 10.3.0.3, that's correct.
Fastethernet1/0, 10.0.0.3, and that is correct.
Okay, and finally I'll check on Router4.
Okay, 10.3.0.4 is good, 10.2.0.4, that is
good also.
Okay, so all of the IP address configurations
look good, and the interfaces are all up/up.
Okay, next step 2, I'll try some pings.
So first from Router1, I'll try to ping these
two interfaces, this one on Router3 and this
one on Router2.
Okay, so I'll go back to Router1.
Ping first Router2's serial0/0 interface,
10.1.0.2.
Okay, looks good.
And next, Router3's fastethernet1/0 interface,
10.0.0.3.
Okay, no problem.
And then step 3, from Router4 ping Router2's
FastEthernet1/0 interface and Router3's serial0/0
interface.
So I'll ping these two interfaces here.
Okay, I'll go on to R4 again.
PING 10.2.0.2, that is Router2's fastethernet1/0.
Okay.
And Router3's Serial0/0.
Okay, all looks good.
So the initial configurations are fine.
All the interfaces are up/up and there is
connectivity, they can all ping each other.
Next, task 2, plan for OSPF.
All four routers should be members of the
backbone area.
What is the area ID of the backbone?
So, as I said in the last video, the backbone
area is area 0.
Now, for single area OSPF you don't actually
have to use area 0, the backbone, you can
use any area number, area 1 2 3 4 5, whatever
number you want.
However generally it's recommended that you
use area 0 for single area OSPF.
And that is one of the requirements of this
lab.
Okay step 2, your configuration should be
specific enough so that as additional networks
are added to the router those networks are
not automatically advertised.
Okay, so we have to be specific with our NETWORK
statements.
We can't use the trick I showed you earlier,
NETWORK 0.0.0.0 255.255.255.255, to activate
OSPF on all interfaces.
We should be specific about which networks
we want to advertise.
Okay, the IP routing tables on each router
should be populated with the specific IP subnets
in your network.
Using the IP addresses table, list the specific
networks and masks that should be configured
to satisfy this requirement.
So, we should configure the specific subnet
on each interface.
So, all of them are /24, as you can see.
So if you want to know the network address
just change this last number to 0.
So, for example on Router1 there is 10.0.0.0/24
and 10.1.0.0/24.
Router2 has 10.1.0.0/24 and 10.2.0.0/24.
Router3 has 10.0.0.0/24 and 10.3.0.0/24.
And finally Router4 has 10.2.0.0/24 and 10.3.0.0/24.
So those are all the subnets.
Okay, so that's step 2.
Step 3, list the OSPF network commands necessary
to accomplish the configuration requirement
in the previous step.
Okay, so we'll configure the NETWORK statements
I just said, but you have to make sure to
use a wildcard mask, so the /24 would not
be 255.255.255.0, it would be the inverse,
so 0.0.0.255.
So, just to show you the commands that you
would use on each router, let's look at the
lab solutions down here.
And here they are.
So, for example on Router1, NETWORK 10.0.0.0
0.0.0.255 AREA 0, and then the same for 10.1.0.0.
And you can check on Router2, 3 and 4 as well.
Okay, now from step 4 it talks about some
aspects of OSPF that we haven't covered yet
in the last video, for example DR, that stands
for Designated Router, which is an important
topic in OSPF and I will cover it over the
next couple videos.
So, I'm going to end this lab preview here.
If you want to try this lab and all of these
other OSPF labs out yourself, make sure to
get a copy of NetSim from the link in the
description.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
Thank you to Florian, Daming, Venkatesh, Kone,
Joshua, Jhilmar, Samil, Ed, Value, Magrathea,
Justin, John, funnydart, Scott, Hassan, Gerrard,
Tibi, Joyce, Marek, Velvijaykum, C Mohd, Johan,
Mark, Miguel, Yousif, Sidi, Boson Software,
Charlesetta, Devin, Lito, Mike, Yonatan, and
Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
One of you is still displaying as Channel
failed to load, if this is you please let
me know and I’ll see if YouTube can fix
it.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, August 4th
2020, if you signed up recently and your name
isn’t on here don’t worry, you’ll be
in future videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.